in this video we're going to look at a
special case of extensive form games
that is often very useful in
applications and it's the special case
of multi-stage games
now that we have introduced extensive
form games it's time to take a step back
and think about what are the advantages
and what are the disadvantages of this
model
so
the biggest advantage of the game of an
extensive form game is that it's very
general as long as the interaction is
finite which means that it ends in
finite time and players have finitely
many actions available we can describe
any interaction in an extensive form
game
and we have seen that the notion of
information sets allows us to describe
many different types of strategic
situations
um where players have imperfect
information due to either strategic
uncertainty if they play at the same
time
payoff uncertainty
if they don't pay off relevant
characteristic of each other or
imperfect observation if they
only see a stochastic signal about each
other's past actions
and another very helpful advantage is
that we can draw the game especially for
small games and this helps us develop an
idea for some of the more complicated
concepts like we can draw the
distribution that is induced for a
certain strategy profile
now some of the disadvantages of an
extensive form game well the first one
is that
it is necessarily finite so
some interactions between
countries or companies we don't
necessarily expect to be finite
and
another disadvantage is that notation
can be quite cumbersome
um
because of the generality we have to
keep track of the player's nodes we have
a map from nodes to active player
then
we have to partition a player's nodes
into
their information sets and on each
information set there may be different
actions that the players can take
and this is all needed for the sake of
generality
but it can make the notation quite
difficult
and in addition to that it can also mean
that
analyzing
a model
can be quite complicated analyzing a
model model in full generality
now if we think about
more application specific disadvantages
then an extensive form gained because of
its generality
is prone to over specification
we can
model many moving parts and in terms of
estimation there's lots of parameters we
need to estimate
and this means we need to have more and
more data to
reasonably well um
estimate the model
now do we really need
such a general model well
the reason why we introduced extensive
form game was we wanted to be able to
describe dynamic interactions
now if i think about dynamic
interactions that we like to study in
economics
then i think that
in many examples we don't really need
that much generality for example very
frequently we study
oligopolies dual police between
companies so competition entry returns
and the nature of the interaction
doesn't change too much um if we have
oil companies
that compete in the global market for
oil then
their strategic interaction from one
quarter to the next doesn't really
change all that much
the same if we have business
partnerships or climate agreements
between countries
the set of available actions that they
have in one year does not change too
much from the next
and then other dynamic applications that
we have seen there's bargaining um where
also
the
the proposal that the players can make
is identical in each period
and so
the idea is that maybe we can simplify
the framework to improve tractability
and simplify the notation
and in this video we will look at one
way of how we can do this
in what is known as multi-stage games in
a multi-stage game players play a
sequence of static games
so here visually indicated by gt
is the static game that players play at
time t
and so
instead of branching out
through a tree
now we have a more more linear
flow of the gate of the game where
the players simply play a sequence of
simultaneous move games
in
sequence now
the simplest case of a multi-stage game
is where players repeat
the same simultaneous move game in each
period and we call these games repeated
games
how does the notation
look like or how does a notation
simplify compared to extensive form
games well
a set of available actions we can now
describe
simply as a function of time and they do
not depend on the history at all
and because
um it's a simultaneous move game at each
time
um
we can again go back to our notion of of
action profiles that the players choose
and go back to the notation that we used
in static games
now for the games that we look at in
this video we will assume that at the
end of each
period the players observe all the
actions that were taken in that period
and so
this the players all have the same set
of histories available
and again this simplifies
um sort of histories um by quite a large
amount
so every player has the same set of
histories and the available actions only
depend on time
now what's a behavior strategy in this
setting um
well if we denote by h
so by h t
we denote
the set of histories we serve all
histories of length t
and then by h we denote the set of all
possible histories this should be an
infinity here and this should be an n
and then the behavior strategies are
going to map from
all possible histories to
the set of
mixed actions that are available at time
t
i guess should be capital t here not and
it could be infinity
so
and a multi-stage game is still an
extensive form game
and
we can still write it down as a game
tree but the special property is now
that the continuation game after each
branch is um strategically identical so
if we solve for all the continuation
equilibria after
one node here then we now have
at the same time solved
the continuation of numerical
continuation equilibrium after any of
the other nodes that can be reached from
the first period interaction
now
this week
or in this class we'll only look at
finitely repeated games but repeated
games are particularly useful if we look
at an infinitely repeated setting and in
that case we can't
rely on
the assumption that payoffs are only
earned at the end of the game
at the terminal nodes so what we will do
is we will say at the end of each period
players receive
the utility that they get from the
interaction in the first period
now having set up the game the last
thing that we need is we need to know
the distribution that is induced
um by the player's
strategies
and
the distribution that is induced over
the outcomes and here the outcomes are
simply the realized action profile in
each
stage game
so the entire sequence of it
and then this is defined in the same way
as an extensive form game and then
the
players aim to maximize the discounted
expected future payoff where they
discount
future values by some discount factor
delta
and they simply maximize the discounted
sum of their expected utilities
over the entire course of the game
and the discount factor um
will have to be smaller than one if the
game is infinite
all right let's look at an example to
make this
notation
or this formalism more specific
one frequent application of repeated
games is the study of a climate
agreement
and in a climate agreement
this is one of these public goods
problems where
the all countries would benefit if they
all reduce greenhouse gases the problem
is because
air quality or the environment is a
public good this means that
we still benefit from a reduction of
greenhouse gases by the other countries
even if we don't contribute ourselves
so this means that
each country
prefers that everybody else who do
greenhouse gases without having to
reduce their own greenhouse gases and so
this is
a strategy or a game where
not reducing greenhouse gases is a
strictly dominant strategies and in
terms of climate agreement we can say
that
if the countries sign a climate
agreement then
if they adhere to it they all reduce
greenhouse gases which is good for
everybody
but it's always slightly better to not
adhere the climate agreement and let the
others reduce greenhouse gases and then
the unique nash equilibrium of the stage
game
is where both countries violate the
agreement
now this is if we have a single
interaction
now
one reason how we can motivate this
static nash equilibrium is because
countries don't have to worry about the
future
they don't have to worry that
the others can the other countries will
retaliate against them in the future
now
if we repeat this interaction for t
periods
then
does there exist the sub-game perfect
equilibrium in which the countries are
willing to adhere to the climate
agreement
so let's
see
whether this is so so
in this case we can solve it
visually by drawing the game tree
so
so here what i wrote down here are the
terminal payoffs after
two periods
and so 4 4 is earned in the first period
and then delta u of a2 is simply what
the players earn in the second period
and
yeah so after
any action profile that is chosen
the countries already own their payoffs
from the first period and so it doesn't
really does not really matter what
happened before um in the game so they
only
look forward in the future and try to
maximize the utility from this point on
but
after one period there's only one period
left so we're again back at the
simultaneous move game in which we know
that the unique nash equilibrium is vv
where both countries violate the
agreement
now if both countries violate agreement
then this means that no payoffs will be
earned in the second period
and the game essentially reduces to
a single stage game
and in a single stage game we know that
unique nash equilibrium is for both
countries to violate the agreement and
so the unique sub-game perfect
equilibrium is where
both countries violate
the climate agreement
now the reason why this is so is because
no matter the history
there's a unique nash equilibrium going
forward
and
this destroys any incentives in previous
periods because by subgame perfection
there's only one
continuation profile that can be played
and this destroys incentives
and this is true more generally we can
convince ourselves that if we look at a
finitely repeated game
with a unique static nash equilibrium so
when we say static nash equilibrium we
refer to a nash equilibrium of the stage
game
then the unique sub-game perfect
equilibrium is repeated play of this
static nash equilibrium and the idea is
it proceeds by backward induction in the
last period players have to play this
nash equilibrium but then if this is
played no matter what happens before
then we can't
support any non-trivial incentives
because no matter what the players do
the static nash equilibrium will be
played
so
[Music]
let's write this down formally so in the
last period in any subject perfect
equilibrium the static nash equilibrium
has to be played and then we show
inductively that
the static nash equilibrium has to be
played in any period
if it has been played
in all future periods
and the proof is one line we
write down
the expected utility that the players
receive
then
so here
the total weight
of this should be t minus t of the last
t periods
is delta t minus t
and in all those periods the static nash
equilibrium is played by the inductive
hypothesis
and so they just earn ui alpha n in all
future periods and
this is independent of the history
so this means that
no matter what the players do they'll
get zero in the continuation payoff
and
in that case they must play
a static nash equilibrium in period t as
well
now
if we look at the paris agreement
um
then
the paris agreement has not just
two options where you either adhere to
the terms of the agreement or you're
violated
in the climate agreement
the countries can actually set the goals
themselves so here it will be
implemented to reflect equity
and the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities and
capabilities in the light of different
national circumstances
and
yeah so they
each country
tries to set their own contributions
that they try to achieve
and then there will be
some sanctions if they do not satisfy
their own goals
but so what we can say here now is we
can modify our model and say that okay
in addition to violating the agreement
or not signing the agreement i guess
players can set ambitious goals or
moderate goals so moderate goals would
be goals that are easy to accomplish and
the country's you know safe face by
setting moderate goals over
flat out violating the agreement
and now in this
modified version here um
the the ambitious outcome is still the
best um
still has the highest social surplus
[Music]
then if
players
players would still like to deviate set
moderate goals only or violate agreement
because they can benefit in the same way
as before
now this stage game has two pure
strategy nash equilibria so the previous
argument doesn't work anymore
and the question is does this difference
here that there are two pure strategy
nash equilibria does this have an impact
on the outcomes that can be supported in
a cycling perfect equilibrium or
specifically in the twice repeating game
can we support
the beneficial outcome where both
countries set ambitious goals
well the idea is
that now there we have a choice
in a self-imperfect equilibrium there
could be two ways how the game can end
the game can end in the more beneficial
nash equilibrium will both set moderate
gold
or it could end
in
the poor static nash equilibrium where
they both violate the agreement and the
idea is that we can
make the choice of which static nash
equilibrium is played in the last period
contingent
on the history contingent on the actions
that have been played in the first
period
so the idea is that if we want to
support ambitious goals then we will
reward the countries
for playing a with
the
better of the two static nash equilibria
in the last period
and we use the worst nash equilibrium vv
as a punishment if the players play
anything else
so here
um
formally if we write down the strategy
profile we were talking in the beginning
in the first period we said ambitious
goals then the second period we set
moderate goals if and only if we have
set ambitious goals in the first period
and we violate the agreement otherwise
let's see
if this is a sub-game-perfect
equilibrium well in the second period it
is because
players play aesthetic nash equilibrium
so we only have to verify whether
setting ambitious goals is incentive
compatible in the first period now if we
go back to the
payoff table then we see that
a country has two deviations but the
most profitable deviation is to violate
the agreement
so for any deviation that the countries
take the punishment will be vv
regardless of the deviation so we will
look at the more profitable deviation
which is deviating to v
so if they deviate to v they get five
right now
but then they get zero in the future
because vb will be played
and if they follow
the strategy profile sigma then they get
4 right now and then they will get 2 in
the next period which is worth 2 delta
and so we see that as long as delta is
sufficiently large
this deviation is not profitable and so
indeed we can support
a subgame perfect equilibrium in which
countries set ambitious goals
as long as the discount factor is large
or equal than one-half
and this allows us
to summarize what was necessary to
support
inter-temporal incentives so for players
to play something that is not a static
nash equilibrium we need two key
ingredients
so we need
two continuation equilibria that have
non-identical payoffs so we can use one
of them as a reward equilibrium and the
other one as a punishment equilibrium
for deviating
so this was one of the key ingredients
that we need and the second key
ingredient is that the discount factor
is sufficiently high so that
the difference in these continuation
payoffs
matter for the countries if the discount
factor is too low this means that the
countries don't really value payoffs in
the future and if they don't they don't
care about a difference in the
continuation equilibrium
so if we have these two key ingredients
then we can support non-trivial
intertemporal incentives
okay this was
the case for
two period games can we do the same for
long or repeated games
can countries support ambitious goals in
a sub-game perfect equilibria
and the answer is yes and
we will analyze that in micro2 if you
care to join me in that class
what i would like to do in this class is
i would like to
use these key ingredients here to solve
a multi-stage game that is not a
repeated game
and we will see that we can use the same
idea
so
every
game theory class
or most game theory classes starts with
the prisoner's dilemma and for our class
it will be the last example that we see
for games with complete information
and the other prisoners dilemma the
story is that you interrogate to
suspects separately from each other
they have
committed a heinous crime um where if
you had evidence you could put them in
jail for 10 years
but currently you only have evidence for
let's say
tax fraud so you can only put them away
for one year so you interrogate them
separately and you ask them to testify
against their partner in crime
and if they do you will have enough
evidence against them against their
partner and whoever testified will get a
sentence reduction of one year for
cooperation
so if they both testify then they both
go to jail for nine years
now this is the prisoner's dilemma very
famously has
a strictly dominant strategy so
testifying is always
has always a punishment of one year
lower than staying silent regardless of
what your partner in crime does
so the unique nash equilibrium is where
they both testify
now let's look at a variation of the
game where we have the standard
prisoner's dilemma in the first period
and in the second period
we will look at the aftermath what
happens when the two come out of jail
and once they come out of jail the
prisoners can either let bygones be
bygones which means that
they let the past be the past
or they can join a gang and go after the
other inmate and hurt them
now the stage two equilibrium or the
stage two game has two pure strategy and
ash equilibrium where they both let
bygones be bygones or where they both
join a gang
so one player's joining a gang is not an
equilibrium because then the other one
also needs to join a gang for protection
now to make the announce simple suppose
that the discount factor is one so the
players simply care about the sum and
the payoffs from the two periods
and can we find now the pure strategy
something perfect equilibria of the of
this game
by using these key ingredients that we
have formulated where
we need a difference in continuation
payoffs so here between bb and gg
and
then the players are sufficiently
patient
so the first thing that we try to
achieve is can we support silence in a
sub-game perfect equilibrium
and the idea from that we formulated
previously is that we will reward
silence with the good equilibrium where
they both let bygones be bygones
and we punish anything else with
not the players joining again
okay is this in equilibrium well if they
stay silent they both get minus one in
the first period and then
that's it bygones are bygones zero in
the second period
and
if they testify then
they'll get zero in the first period but
they have to join a gang in the second
period to protect against the
retaliation of the other which will net
the minus three
and this is a sub-game perfect
equilibrium
can we support different behavior in the
first period
can we support
silence and testify testifying by one
player
and indeed we can if we use the same
reward scheme
then
following this strategy profile has
exactly the same incentives forever who
stay silent
and
whoever testifies well testifying is
already a best response so
they don't need incentives to testify in
the first period
so we see that because the difference in
continuation payoffs is three between
the two static nash equilibria then we
can
prevent any deviation with immediate
gain that is smaller or equal to three
so specifically we can support
silence
by
attaching the good equilibrium outcome
and a unilateral deviation by player i
to testify we can
use
the bad equilibrium
and to support silence from one player
it's only necessary that we attach the
bad equilibrium outcome to when that
player
when that player testifies
and
well how can we support
testifying well in any other case so in
this way we can support
silence and then anything else
supports
testifying because testifying is the
best response so unless
testifying is punished and silence is
rewarded players are willing to testify
now let's see if we can find all subgame
perfect equilibria
all right
we go back to supporting silence and
what we need is silence
is rewarded and unilateral deviation so
deviations by only one players are
punished
but
the continuation equilibrium after they
both testify
does not matter for supporting silence
because it cannot be reached by a
unilateral deviation right an
equilibrium is only robust to changes by
one player given that everybody else
does the same
so t t cannot be reached by such a
deviation
so the continuation equilibrium after tt
is unrestricted
except that it has to be a static nash
equilibrium by the requirement of soft
imperfection
and so we see that there is two possible
fewer strategies of imperfect equilibria
that support silence and they differ by
the action that they prescribe
on this outcome tt that cannot be
reached by either the strategy or a
deviation by only one player
then supporting silence by only one
player we see that
we only need to
reward
silence
reward the path with bb and then punish
the unilateral deviation by the first
player
um with the bad outcome
so the other two are unrestricted either
because
ts cannot be reached by deviation by one
player or ss because
player two does not need incentives so
as long as
t is rewarded it does not matter what
happens if they deviate and so we get
enough force of gain perfect equilibrium
to support this outcome
by symmetry ts
is also supported by force of imperfect
equilibria
and lastly testifying by both well
if testifying is rewarded
then it does not matter
then we don't need any punishments
because this is the best possible
outcome for the players
so we have eight possible subgame
perfect equilibria so two to the power
of three for all um
the different possible
choices of continuation equilibrium
and then
if
we punish testifying
then
players have sufficient incentives to
testify as long as a deviation to
staying silent is not rewarded
so if
on the path we play gg then we also need
to play gg for each of the unilateral
deviations and this leaves us
two possible choices for the
continuation equilibrium after ss
so in total we have 20
pure strategy in ash equilibria and
using this approach we have found them
all in less than five minutes and just
imagine how long it would have taken to
go backwards through the tree and
finding 20 nash equilibria or 20
sub-game perfect equilibrium
so this approach of
looking at
what's the most what's the best reward
equilibrium that we can use and what's
the
most severe punishment equilibrium that
we can use
it's very powerful to find something
perfect equilibria quickly and will also
help us actually if we look at
sub-imperfect equilibria in
extensive form games so in any subgame
we only have to look at
the
the most rewarding equilibrium and the
most punishing equilibrium for all the
players to find
the equilibrium behavior in the rest of
the tree
and so i decided to make this slide here
the summary of this video really because
this is the key concept that i wanted to
get across
all right some questions for you to fill
out
and
the literature
well repeated games are discussed again
in any other game theory books but there
is one book that is super good in
particular which is the one by milath
and samuelson specifically about
repeated games
alright that's it for this video and
i'll see you in the next one